README.md, before:

# OTPCL

## What is it?

Open Telecom Platform Command Language, a.k.a. Tcl-flavored Erlang.
Or maybe it's Erlang-flavored Tcl?

## How do I use it?

For now, clone this repo, and make sure you have rebar3 installed.
Then, from the repo's root:

```
$ rebar3 compile
[ ... bunch of rebar3 output that hopefully looks successful ... ]

$ bin/otpcl
OTPCL Shell (WIP!)

otpcl> print "Hello, world!~n"
Hello, world!
ok
```

You can also use it from an existing project in some other BEAM-based
language (note that said language will need to be able to see OTPCL's
compiled libs; this happens automatically if you're doing things with
Hex like described below, but otherwise, you'll have to point to it
with the ERL_LIBS variable).

For example, in Erlang (w/ rebar3):

```
$ grep otpcl rebar.config
{deps, [{otpcl, "0.1.2"}]}.
$ rebar3 shell
Eshell V10.0  (abort with ^G)
1> otpcl:eval("import io; format {Hello, world!~n}").
Hello, world!
[ ... bunch of output because we just imported everything from
      Erlang's io module and otpcl:eval returns the full
      interpreter state when it's done executing stuff ... ]
```

And again, in Elixir (w/ Mix):

```
$ grep otpcl mix.exs
      {;otpcl, "~> 0.1.2"}
$ iex -S mix
Interactive Elixir (1.7.3) - press Ctrl+C to exit (type h() ENTER for help)
iex(1)> :otpcl.eval("import Elixir.IO; puts {Hello, world!}")
Hello, world!
[ ... bunch of output because we just imported everything from
      Elixir's IO module and :otpcl.eval returns the full
      interpreter state when it's done executing stuff ... ]
```

## What (else) can it do?

Well, as you might've guessed from above, it can parse a Tcl-like
language:

```erlang

2> otpcl:parse("foo {bar $baz {bam [bat $baf]} bal} $bad $bak$bae [bah $bay]").
{ok,{parsed,program,
        [{parsed,command,
             [{parsed,unquoted,
                  [{102,{nofile,0,0}},{111,{nofile,0,1}},{111,{nofile,0,2}}]},
              {parsed,braced,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,5}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,6}},
                   {114,{nofile,0,7}},
                   {32,{nofile,0,8}},
                   {36,{nofile,0,9}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,10}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,11}},
                   {122,{nofile,0,12}},
                   {32,{nofile,0,13}},
                   {123,{nofile,0,14}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,...}},
                   {97,{nofile,...}},
                   {109,{...}},
                   {32,...},
                   {...}|...]},
              {parsed,var_unquoted,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,37}},{97,{nofile,0,38}},{100,{nofile,0,39}}]},
              {parsed,var_unquoted,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,42}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,43}},
                   {107,{nofile,0,44}},
                   {36,{nofile,0,45}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,46}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,47}},
                   {101,{nofile,0,48}}]},
              {parsed,funcall,
                  [{parsed,unquoted,
                       [{98,{nofile,0,51}},
                        {97,{nofile,0,52}},
                        {104,{nofile,0,53}}]},
                   {parsed,var_unquoted,
                       [{98,{nofile,0,56}},
                        {97,{nofile,0,57}},
                        {121,{nofile,0,...}}]}]}]}]},
    []}

```

And it can interpret that language, too:

```erlang

3> otpcl:eval("set foo 1; set bar 2; set baz 3; incr foo").
{2,
 {#{decr => fun otpcl_stdlib:decr/2,
    'if' => fun otpcl_stdlib:if/2,
    incr => fun otpcl_stdlib:incr/2,
    print => fun otpcl_stdlib:print/2,
    set => fun otpcl_stdlib:set/2,
    unless => fun otpcl_stdlib:unless/2},
  #{'RETVAL' => 2,bar => 2,baz => 3,foo => 2}}}

```

And as demonstrated above, you can do things from the OTPCL shell/REPL
(albeit with very poor error handling at the moment, alas):

```
otpcl> import math
ok
otpcl> exp 4
54.598150033144236
otpcl> exp foo
error: badarg
Stacktrace:
  math:exp/[foo]
  otpcl_stdmeta:'-import/2-fun-1-'/4
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_stdmeta.erl"
    line: 33
  otpcl_eval:interpret/2
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_eval.erl"
    line: 87
  otpcl_shell:eval/2
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_shell.erl"
    line: 46
```

We can define new Erlang functions and include them as functions for
our interpreter, both from the Erlang side:

```erlang

4> Sum = fun (Nums, State) -> {lists:sum(Nums), State} end.
#Fun<erl_eval.12.127694169>
5> {ok, State} = otpcl_stdmeta:'fun'([set, sum, Sum], otpcl_env:default_state()).
[ ... interpreter state output ... ]
6> {RetVal, NewState} = otpcl:eval("sum 1 2 3 4 5", State).
[ ... interpreter state output ... ]
7> RetVal.
15

```

And from the OTPCL side:

```
otpcl> fun set sum [eval erlang {
  ...> fun (Nums, State) ->
  ...>   {lists:sum(Nums), State}
  ...> end.
  ...> }]
ok
otpcl> sum 1 2 3 4 5
15
```

And of course, no programming language would be complete if we can't
define functions in that language:

```
otpcl> def howdy {$pardner} {
  ...> return <howdy $pardner>
  ...> }
ok
otpcl> howdy buckaroo
{howdy,buckaroo}
otpcl> def multi-test {a} {
  ...> return "It's an 'a'!"
  ...> } {1} {
  ...> return "It's a 1!"
  ...> } {$else} {
  ...> return "It's something else..."
  ...> }
ok
otpcl> multi-test a
<<"It's an 'a'!">>
otpcl> multi-test 1
<<"It's a 1!">>
otpcl> multi-test asdf
<<"It's something else...">>

```

Or, as demonstrated above, you can even import them, whether as whole
modules:

```
otpcl> import random; uniform 8675309
3848234
```

Or as individual functions:

```
otpcl> import string (split uppercase)
ok
otpcl> split [uppercase "foo,bar,baz"] ","
[<<"FOO">>,<<"BAR,BAZ">>]
```

There's still a lot of work to be done, but it ain't bad for my
first-ever programming language, I'd say (and with a hand-written
parser, to boot!).

## What *should* it do?

* Tokenizer (100%)

* Parser (90%) (probably more stuff that can be added, like pipes; I
  like pipes, and therefore want to add them)

* Interpreter (90%) (pretty sure it's fully functional, but plenty of
  room for polish)

* Standard library / built-in functions (10%)

* Compiler (0%)

* REPL/shell (75%) (mostly functional, and does a decent job of error
  reporting now, but plenty of room for polish)

* Tests (no idea what the test coverage is right now, but hey, at
  least I wrote (some) tests this time!)

* Docs (0%; something something self-documenting code something
  something)

* Install procedure that's actually sane (or for that matter exists at
  all)

## What's the actual syntax?

Like with Tcl, an OTPCL program is a sequence of
vertical-whitespace-delimited commands (semicolons counting as
"vertical whitespace" in this context), each of which is a sequence of
horizontal-whitespace-delimited words (note: not all forms of
horizontal/vertical whitespace are currently recognized as such by the
parser, whereas a backslash-escaped newline *is* recognized as such).

A word may be any of the following:

* An atom (either `unquoted` or `'Single Quoted'`)
* An integer (`123` or `-123`)
* A float (`123.456` or `-123.456`)
* A binary string (either `"double quoted"` or `{curly braced}`)
* A charlist string (backquoted)
* A list (`(word-elements surrounded by parentheses)`)
* A tuple (`<word-elements surrounded by angle brackets>`)
* A variable substitution (either `$unquoted` or `${braced}`)
* A function call substitution (`[command inside square brackets]`)

### Crash Course

```tcl
this is a command  # this is a comment
this is one command; this is another command
this command (accepts a list)
this command <accepts a tuple>
this command "accepts a binary string"
this command {also accepts a binary string}
this command `accepts an Erlang-style charlist string`
this command 'Accepts an atom that has spaces in it'
this command will use a $variable ${another variable} and a [function call]
this command \
    continues on the next line \
    and takes a (list that also \
                 continues onto another line)
```

## What's the license?

OpenBSD-style ISC License:

> Copyright (c) 2018, 2019 Ryan S. Northrup <northrup@yellowapple.us>

> Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for
> any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the
> above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all
> copies.

> THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL
> WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED
> WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
> AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
> DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA
> OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER
> TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
> PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Absurdly-giant refactor to usher in version 0.2.0
Like, wow.  There are actually docs!  And even some typespecs that are probably
worthless (and I'm almost certainly going to gut at the earliest opportunity).

README.md, after:

# OTPCL

## What is it?

Open Telecom Platform Command Language, a.k.a. Tcl-flavored Erlang.
Or maybe it's Erlang-flavored Tcl?

## How do I use it?

For now, clone this repo, and make sure you have rebar3 installed.
Then, from the repo's root:

```
$ rebar3 compile
[ ... bunch of rebar3 output that hopefully looks successful ... ]

$ bin/otpcl
OTPCL Shell (WIP!)

otpcl> print "Hello, world!~n"
Hello, world!
ok
```

You can also use it from an existing project in some other BEAM-based
language (note that said language will need to be able to see OTPCL's
compiled libs; this happens automatically if you're doing things with
Hex like described below, but otherwise, you'll have to point to it
with the ERL_LIBS variable).

For example, in Erlang (w/ rebar3):

```
$ grep otpcl rebar.config
{deps, [{otpcl, "0.2.0"}]}.
$ rebar3 shell
Eshell V10.0  (abort with ^G)
1> otpcl:eval("import io; format {Hello, world!~n}").
Hello, world!
[ ... bunch of output because we just imported everything from
      Erlang's io module and otpcl:eval returns the full
      interpreter state when it's done executing stuff ... ]
```

And again, in Elixir (w/ Mix):

```
$ grep otpcl mix.exs
      {:otpcl, "~> 0.2.0"}
$ iex -S mix
Interactive Elixir (1.7.3) - press Ctrl+C to exit (type h() ENTER for help)
iex(1)> :otpcl.eval("import Elixir.IO; puts {Hello, world!}")
Hello, world!
[ ... bunch of output because we just imported everything from
      Elixir's IO module and :otpcl.eval returns the full
      interpreter state when it's done executing stuff ... ]
```

## What (else) can it do?

Well, as you might've guessed from above, it can parse a Tcl-like
language:

```erlang

2> otpcl:parse("foo {bar $baz {bam [bat $baf]} bal} $bad $bak$bae [bah $bay]").
{ok,{parsed,program,
        [{parsed,command,
             [{parsed,unquoted,
                  [{102,{nofile,0,0}},{111,{nofile,0,1}},{111,{nofile,0,2}}]},
              {parsed,braced,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,5}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,6}},
                   {114,{nofile,0,7}},
                   {32,{nofile,0,8}},
                   {36,{nofile,0,9}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,10}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,11}},
                   {122,{nofile,0,12}},
                   {32,{nofile,0,13}},
                   {123,{nofile,0,14}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,...}},
                   {97,{nofile,...}},
                   {109,{...}},
                   {32,...},
                   {...}|...]},
              {parsed,var_unquoted,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,37}},{97,{nofile,0,38}},{100,{nofile,0,39}}]},
              {parsed,var_unquoted,
                  [{98,{nofile,0,42}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,43}},
                   {107,{nofile,0,44}},
                   {36,{nofile,0,45}},
                   {98,{nofile,0,46}},
                   {97,{nofile,0,47}},
                   {101,{nofile,0,48}}]},
              {parsed,funcall,
                  [{parsed,unquoted,
                       [{98,{nofile,0,51}},
                        {97,{nofile,0,52}},
                        {104,{nofile,0,53}}]},
                   {parsed,var_unquoted,
                       [{98,{nofile,0,56}},
                        {97,{nofile,0,57}},
                        {121,{nofile,0,...}}]}]}]}]},
    []}

```

And it can interpret that language, too:

```erlang

3> otpcl:eval("set foo 1; set bar 2; set baz 3").
{3,
 {#{decr => fun otpcl_stdlib:decr/2,
    'if' => fun otpcl_stdlib:if/2,
    incr => fun otpcl_stdlib:incr/2,
    print => fun otpcl_stdlib:print/2,
    set => fun otpcl_stdlib:set/2,
    unless => fun otpcl_stdlib:unless/2},
  #{'RETVAL' => 3,bar => 2,baz => 3,foo => 1}}}

```

And as demonstrated above, you can do things from the OTPCL shell/REPL
(albeit with very poor error handling at the moment, alas):

```
otpcl> import math
ok
otpcl> exp 4
54.598150033144236
otpcl> exp foo
error: badarg
Stacktrace:
  math:exp/[foo]
  otpcl_stdmeta:'-import/2-fun-1-'/4
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_stdmeta.erl"
    line: 33
  otpcl_eval:interpret/2
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_eval.erl"
    line: 87
  otpcl_shell:eval/2
    file: "/home/ryno/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_shell.erl"
    line: 46
```

We can define new Erlang functions and include them as functions for
our interpreter, both from the Erlang side:

```erlang

4> Sum = fun (Nums, State) -> {lists:sum(Nums), State} end.
#Fun<erl_eval.12.127694169>
5> {ok, State} = otpcl_meta:cmd([sum, Sum], otpcl_env:default_state()).
[ ... interpreter state output ... ]
6> {RetVal, NewState} = otpcl:eval("sum 1 2 3 4 5", State).
[ ... interpreter state output ... ]
7> RetVal.
15

```

And of course, no programming language would be complete if we can't
define functions in that language:

```
otpcl> cmd howdy {$pardner} {
  ...> return <howdy $pardner>
  ...> }
ok
otpcl> howdy buckaroo
{howdy,buckaroo}
otpcl> cmd multi-test {a} {
  ...> return "It's an 'a'!"
  ...> } {1} {
  ...> return "It's a 1!"
  ...> } {$else} {
  ...> return "It's something else..."
  ...> }
ok
otpcl> multi-test a
<<"It's an 'a'!">>
otpcl> multi-test 1
<<"It's a 1!">>
otpcl> multi-test asdf
<<"It's something else...">>

```

Or, as demonstrated above, you can even import them, whether as whole
modules:

```
otpcl> import random; uniform 8675309
3848234
```

Or as individual functions:

```
otpcl> import string (split uppercase)
ok
otpcl> split [uppercase "foo,bar,baz"] ","
[<<"FOO">>,<<"BAR,BAZ">>]
```

Alternately, if you want to avoid namespace clashes:

```
otpcl> use string
ok
otpcl> string split [string uppercase "foo,bar,baz"] ","
[<<"FOO">>,<<"BAR,BAZ">>]
```

There's still a lot of work to be done, but it ain't bad for my
first-ever programming language, I'd say (and with a hand-written
parser, to boot!).

## What *should* it do?

* Tokenizer (100%)

* Parser (100%) (there are probably bugs, but it's otherwise complete)

* Interpreter (100%) (there are probably bugs, but it's otherwise complete)

* Standard library / built-in functions (50%)

* Compiler (0%)

* REPL/shell (75%) (mostly functional, and does a decent job of error
  reporting now, but plenty of room for polish)

* Tests (no idea what the test coverage is right now, but hey, at
  least I wrote (some) tests this time!)

* Docs (80%) (making it a point to document new functions as I go)

* Install procedure that's actually sane (or for that matter exists at
  all)

## What's the actual syntax?

Like with Tcl, an OTPCL program is a sequence of
vertical-whitespace-delimited commands (semicolons counting as
"vertical whitespace" in this context), each of which is a sequence of
horizontal-whitespace-delimited words (note: not all forms of
horizontal/vertical whitespace are currently recognized as such by the
parser, whereas a backslash-escaped newline *is* recognized as such).

A word may be any of the following:

* An atom (either `unquoted` or `'Single Quoted'`)
* An integer (`123` or `-123`)
* A float (`123.456` or `-123.456`)
* A binary string (either `"double quoted"` or `{curly braced}`)
* A charlist string (backquoted)
* A list (`(word-elements surrounded by parentheses)`)
* A tuple (`<word-elements surrounded by angle brackets>`)
* A variable substitution (either `$unquoted` or `${braced}`)
* A function call substitution (`[command inside square brackets]`)

There's also the concept of "pipe commands" - that is, if a word starts with a
pipe, OTPCL will treat it like a newline/semicolon and then treat it as a
command name.  The core pipe operator (`|`) behaves similarly to the pipe
operator in Elixir (`|>`); it'll feed the result of the previous command into
the first argument slot for the next command.

### Crash Course

```tcl
this is a command  # this is a comment
this is one command; this is another command
this command (accepts a list)
this command <accepts a tuple>
this command "accepts a binary string"
this command {also accepts a binary string}
this command `accepts an Erlang-style charlist string`
this command 'Accepts an atom that has spaces in it'
this command will use a $variable ${another variable} and a [function call]
this command \
    continues on the next line \
    and takes a (list that also \
    continues onto another line)
C'est | une | pipe  # Take that, Magritte!
```

## What's the license?

OpenBSD-style ISC License:

> Copyright (c) 2018, 2019 Ryan S. Northrup <northrup@yellowapple.us>

> Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for
> any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the
> above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all
> copies.

> THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL
> WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED
> WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
> AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
> DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA
> OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER
> TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
> PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
